# Leukemia-Subtype-Prediction-from-Gene-Expression-Data
Machine learning models capable of predicting Leukemia subtypes based on given gene expression data.
# Introduction
Leukemias and Lymphomas is the neoplastic proliferation of hematopoietic cells, often belonging to either the lymphoid or myeloid series. Lymphomas originate in the lymphatic system, whereas leukemias generally originate from the bone marrow and enter the bloodstream. Based on the lineage and presentation, leukemias can be classified into: Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), Acute myeloid leukemia (AML), Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). While the progression of the disease varies between each type, the severity of leukemia can be influenced by several factors, including the histological subtype, age of the patient, stage of diagnosis, cytogenetic abnormalities etc.

Early prediction of leukemia is crucial to successful treatment and improved outcomes. Many malignancies are initially asymptomatic and present clinically only when the neoplastic proliferation is beyond the scope of available therapies. For instance, 90% of pancreatic carcinomas at the time of diagnosis would have already progressed to stage IV. In the case of leukemias, certain subtypes like AML-M3 (Promyelocytic leukemia) definitively treated with ATRA (All trans retinoic acid) are associated with excellent prognosis. Naturally, there is a need to detect cancer early, which will improve the chance of treatment before it has spread to other parts of the body.  

Machine learning can play a critical role in predicting leukemia well ahead of time by analyzing large amounts of gene expression data to identify patterns and predict risk factors for developing cancer. By training algorithms on gene expression data of tumor cells from past cases, machine learning models can recognize early warning signs and predict the likelihood of not just developing leukemia in the future, but also its subtype. This presents an exciting opportunity for precision medicine of white cell neoplasms.

# Project Overview
We first obtained a leukemia gene expression dataset containing 7 classes, 22284 genes and 281 sampless from the Curated Microarray Database (CuMiDa). 

First method implemented was Logistic Regression, which is a supervised learning algorithm commonly used for classification tasks. Logistic regression can handle high-dimensional datasets, and it is relatively easy to interpret the results. For classifying the multiple leukemia subtypes, the one-vs-rest (OvR) approach was utilized.

Our second method is K-means, which is an unsupervised learning algorithm that can be used for clustering tasks. It tries to find clusters of data points that are like each other, while being dissimilar to the data points in other clusters. K-means can handle high-dimensional datasets, such as the one in question, and it is relatively fast and simple to implement. K-means is a good choice for this dataset because it can help identify clusters of data points that are similar to each other, which can be useful in identifying different subtypes of leukemia.

Our final method is Support Vector Machines which is a supervised learning algorithm that can be used for classification tasks. It is capable of handling high-dimensional datasets with relatively small sample sizes. SVM tries to find the best hyperplane that separates the data points into different classes while maximizing the margin between the hyperplane and the data points. In other words, SVM tries to find the best boundary between the different classes that can generalize well to new, unseen data. SVM is a good choice for this dataset because it can handle high-dimensional data with a relatively small sample size, and it is effective in finding the best boundary between different classes.
